# EphemeralKibanaOperator

This operator is responsible for managing the lifecycle of Kibana instances in a Kubernetes cluster. It is based on the [Java Operator SDK](https://javaoperatorsdk.io/docs/getting-started) and uses the [Spring Boot Starter for this SDK](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.javaoperatorsdk/operator-framework-spring-boot-starter/).

## Links

* [Create Kubernetes Operators with the Java Operator SDK by Philippe Sevestre](https://www.baeldung.com/java-kubernetes-operator-sdk)
* [Write Kubernetes Operators with the Java Operator SDK by Christophe Laprun](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2022/02/15/write-kubernetes-java-java-operator-sdk#)
* [Simplify Kubernetes Operator Development using Java Operator SDK by Rohan Kumar](https://rohankanojia.github.io/articles/2024/12/06/simplify-kubernetes-operator-development-java-operator-sdk/)
* [jvm-operators/abstract-operator](https://github.com/jvm-operators/abstract-operator)

## The idea

Running Kibana all the time is expensive and if it is not used constantly, it might be a good idea to have a way to create and destroy Kibana instances on demand. This operator is responsible for that. Another idea is to simplify the process of creating Kibana instances by providing a custom resource definition (CRD) that can provide a simpler facade to creating Kibana instances. Kibana has quite a lot of parameters that can be configured, but if we assume an internal Kibana instance that is not exposed to the internet, we can simplify the configuration, for example skipping the authentication and authorization parts. Since this Kibana is not supposed to run all the time, it also does not need to be highly available, so we can skip the clustering part, and add functionality to clean up internal Kibana indices when it shuts down.

## The resources to create

The operator will create the following resources:

- An `EphemeralKibana` custom resource - the parent resource itself
- A `Deployment` for the Kibana instance - this one specifies the Kibana image to use, the environment variables to set etc.
- A `Service` for the Kibana instance - this one specifies the ports to expose.
- `Pod` resources - the actual Kibana instances.

## Running the project locally
### Prerequisites

* Install Docker and make sure that the docker daemon is running
* Install and start the [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start)
* Install and start elasticsearch locally or run it in docker:

```shell
docker run -dt --rm --name elasticsearch -p 9200:9200 -p 9300:9300 --network $network -e "discovery.type=single-node" -e "xpack.security.transport.ssl.enabled=false" -e "xpack.security.http.ssl.enabled=false" -e "xpack.security.enabled=false" docker.elastic.co/elasticsearch/elasticsearch:8.17.2
```

### Kotlin all-open

In Kotlin, all the classes are final by default. Spring, however, can't have that, as it is proxying some classes - like configurations etc.

### Latest state and errors

* Application test is commented out because it fails
* On the application class, `scanBasePackages` is commented out
* The CRD is generated by kapt annotation processing in:

```shell
Note: Generating CRD ephemeralkibanaresources.com.example:
Note:   - v1beta1 -> /Users/marynacherniavska/git/kibana-operator/build/tmp/kapt3/classes/main/META-INF/fabric8/ephemeralkibanaresources.com.example-v1beta1.yml
Note:   - v1 -> /Users/marynacherniavska/git/kibana-operator/build/tmp/kapt3/classes/main/META-INF/fabric8/ephemeralkibanaresources.com.example-v1.yml
```

* The CRD of v1 has been applied to the cluster (from the repo root):

`k apply -f build/tmp/kapt3/classes/main/META-INF/fabric8/ephemeralkibanaresources.com.example-v1.yml`

* The operator controller is starting but doing absolutely nothing.
